So when you go into
the effect component here.
And here in this effect component,
you can basically see here that
it is just a clock, right?
That's basically what you can see here.
Use affect example time and to local time.
Why is this not sticking
in toggle word wrap?
Thank you, okay.
So I have a state here you state,
it is the time and
it starts out with the current time.
You can see wherever I am at
the moment it is currently 10:00 AM.
UseEffect here basically what I'm doing,
is I'm scheduling something to
happen after the first render, and
then I can tell it how often that I
want to rend or be called thereafter.
So in this particular case, useEffect this
function gets scheduled to run, right?
So this does not happen immediately,
this is gonna render first,
then some other stuff might happen,
you don't know and then it's going to run.
But the key here is that you're not gonna
be precisely sure of when it's gonna run.
And we'll get into another
one called use layout effect,
where you actually will
know when it's gonna run.
But suffice to say this will run basically
from your perspective immediately, right?
Like it's gonna run within
milliseconds very likely.
But you're not positive will other
things be scheduled before then, okay?
And the question that you
might have there, is well,
what if I want to make sure that it
does run immediately afterwards?
That's what use layout effect is for, and
we'll talk about that
here in just a second.
So here I have a timer, I set a timeout,
and it returns after one second, right?
And all I'm doing here, is I'm setting
the time here which causes a new
re-render which then schedules
another effect, right?
So that's how it's happening,
every single time is scheduling a new
effect after a re-render, right?
Cuz remember the dependencies here, right?
If I did this and I put this empty array
here, which means it has no dependencies,
notice this now has stopped counting,
right?
Because it stops scheduling
the timer to go off.
But again, if I take that out,
now this is gonna start counting again.
Just pretty cool.
Now you could put in here and
would probably be more accurate if you put
timer in here, or time sorry, not timer.
And notice this would
continue working as well.
You're basically saying like, hey, only
reschedule this whenever time changes.
And by leaving it off, you're basically
saying, hey, when anything changes,
please schedule a new effect.
I think if I had the react hooks eslint,
it would actually tell me to put time and
set time in there.
Cuz basically it's gonna say, hey,
anything that you reference outside of
the body here,
I need that to be a data dependency here.
>> If you have an empty array
that is telling it to just do
it the first time and then never again?
>> Yeah,
that's a good way to think about that.
If I put an empty array here,
it's gonna do at once after it renders for
the first time and then never again.
It's basically component did mount,
if it's effectively component did mount.
It works a little bit differently,
but effectively it's the same.
The nuance there is miniscule.
>> Can you explain where
we can use useEffect?
I understand the useState thing, but
the useEffect I'm not
understanding where we can use it?
Any practical example use of it?
>> Yeah, so useEffect I will
say is probably gonna be your
second most used hook after useState.
So anything that needs to happen
outside of the normal render cycle,
so anytime you need to request
something from an API,
anytime that you need to
subscribe to a WebSocket.
Anytime that you need to
alert the user something
probably even like that
you can use as useEffects.
So anytime that you basically want to
schedule something to happen, that's not
gonna be inside of a render cycle,
you're gonna use an effect to do that.
And I'll just go and say primarily,
you're gonna use it for APIs, right?
Like if you're gonna make
like a fetch request,
you're gonna do instead of an effect.
Here I use the set timeout,
so timeouts and
those kind of things also
would go into effects as well.
So if you wanna schedule a component
update, like every 30 seconds,
you use an effect to do that.
But like if I want to request something
from the API, let's go ahead and
do that really quick.
So if I come in here and
I say const obj = await fetch, and
we can use that API that
we used from yesterday.
So, petsv2.dev-API.
Let's see, I don't even need that.
So and then after that I need to async.
So here I'll call getpets.
And const json= await objects.json.
It's probably blocking
requests outgoing from here.
But suffice to say,
this is how you're gonna do API requests.
And you can look at this from
the complete intro to react as well.
You'll use an effect to render
something for the first time and
then schedule an effect afterwards so that
you can go and fetch stuff from the API.
And you can use that
here out here like say,
setpets to be whatever came back as json.
Does that make sense?
We go over this in depth, there's actually
a section in the complete intro to react
to these six called useEffect.
And that actually goes into that in depth,
so
you can see how we do that from
the confines of the project.
Cool, other questions?
>> So useEffects cannot be async itself,
correct?
>> Yeah, I think if you try and
say async here,
it's gonna say, hey,
I didn't expect promise back here.
>> If you were using an API within,
you would do the pattern that you did and
handle that promise within
the other function?
>> Yeah,
you're you have two choices there.
You can either just handle
the promises directly in here and
say fetch blah, .then.then,
and you can do it that way and
just manipulate the promises directly and
that's fine, I've seen people do that.
I like using async await, so
I'll just make another function and
then call it from within
there just like how you saw.
Line eight here is how you
clean up after yourself.
Whenever something like so, for example,
if I removed this effect from
this useEffect component here,
I'm still gonna have that timeout
happening, and it's going to try and
update something that doesn't exist
which is gonna cause an error.
So you need some way to clear the timeout
after this component gets removed.
Now, obviously, this is not gonna
get removed anytime soon cuz
we have no mechanism to
remove it in our application.
But if it ever did get removed,
we'd have to clear that timeout, right?
And so
that's what this return function here.
You're basically just returning, hey,
if this gets removed,
here is how you gracefully clean up.
In a class component this would
be a component did unmount,
that's the same kind of thing,
it's the same idea.
So it makes sense?
So yeah, you just return a function
here at the end of any effect and
you can allow that to
clean up after yourself.
So in this case, the timer here,
which is the return of the set timeout,
all we do is just say, hey, don't run that
timer, you've just run clear timeout and
it'll prevent that timeout
from executing at the end.
You don't typically need to
clean up your effects, right?
If you're making an API requests, you just
don't do anything about it, which is fine.
It's only when you specifically like,
I think timeout are one of them and
subscriptions, right?
So if you're doing rx-json and you need to
dispose the subscription, that's another
place that you would definitely wanna
do some sort, or like WebSockets.
So if you need to
unsubscribe from updates,
those are the kind of scenarios that you
would do with these cleanup functions.